The tape now, we're talking to Joan Didion.
Why a novel?
I guess you have been quoted as saying that you've kind of lost interest in writing novels.
I did.
I mean, I had sort of lost...
faith that they were going anywhere.
I mean, I didn't have a very good time writing Democracy.
Although once it was finished, I liked it.
But I didn't have a very strong impulse to subject myself and the entire household to that kind of prolonged period of doing something that you weren't having a very good time with.
So I didn't do it for a while.
I did other stuff.
I was interested in this period, and I had already done Miami, which treated some of the same material in nonfiction.
And suddenly I wanted to do something with the material, but I also wanted, suddenly I got the idea that I could do a thriller.
I'd never done a novel plot, a novel where everything had to work like a clock.
And so that idea interested me, and I started doing it in a tentative way.
I'm sorry, what was that word?
In a what way?
In a tentative way.
Okay.
And then I would not get very far with it and set it aside and do something else.
And then finally, it was really just last summer, I took all these pieces of fall starts and sat down with them.
Well, it was a computer file.
It was dated August 31.
And said to John, I'm going to spend the entire fall working on this.
And if I'm not finished by Christmas, I'm going to.
not do it.
And then I did do it by Christmas.
It was actually a terrific period.
It was a good way to work on something.
You can't keep plot ends in your mind if you go away from it.
Do you find that imposing deadlines on yourself is the only way to work?
Well, it is at a certain point when essentially all the stuff is there.
You just have to sit down and pull it together.
And at that point, a deadline is very... I need a deadline, yeah.
And do you impose daily demands on yourself, requirements?
Well, I work every day.
But I don't have a set number of words or pages.
You know, when I was... Some days you end up with a negative.
And sometimes the most useful days you end up with a negative...
Word count, so to speak, but you've made progress in your thought.
Yeah, exactly.
When you talk about the material that you had, could you get into that a little bit for me?
Well, I mean, by the time I sat down, I... I mean, based on, you know, the Miami stuff that you said, you had material.
I'm just wondering if you could probe that a little bit.
I mean, I have been interested in Iran-Contra, but...
in what became known as a Lancome.
So I've been interested in it through the 80s.
I was spending some time in Washington on some things that I eventually didn't do, and also in Miami.
And I had kind of just been interested in that whole stuff that was going on down there.
And so I had a lot of clippings and I had a lot of, then when the things started kind of codifying as a ran contract, quote unquote, of course then we had the hearings and the, you know, volumes of testimony.
So all of that material was what I had to begin with, right?
I mean, that was way back.
That was the material I wanted to deal with.
But by the time I sat down and tried to pull it together last summer, I also, I mean, I had been working on it in all of these false starts long enough so that I had the characters and I had the sense of the general progression that something would, that she would be set up in some way.
I don't know exactly how, obviously, but all, I mean, a whole, there was a, there was a, a,
There was a world not created, but just on the verge of being created.
Is this woman, is this character, I mean, somebody that you know, and I don't mean in a real sense, but I mean, you know this kind of woman who you describe her at one point as going feral, for instance.
I'm just wondering, you start also with an image of this person, as Michiko pointed out in the lead of her review.
You start with this image of this person, so uncharacteristic, out of place.
I'm wondering how you fuse the fictional elements with the factual elements to make a separate work.
I don't know how much of a question that is.
There aren't any factual elements in that character.
There are none.
No.
The only factual element in that entire character...
He said, I once saw a woman eating a chocolate parfait and bacon.
And bacon.
And bacon at the Kahala Hilton in Honolulu.
Wow.
And she had a lot of, I imagine that she was the young wife of a visiting military high place, high officer, because there were a lot of naval aides kind of hovering around asking her what she wanted.
and she was not very happy and very bored, and she did not want to go to the boring museum.
That was what she said.
But that was the only, it was the chocolate parfait and bacon that was the only part of it.
But do you create narratives for these, for people like this, when you see situations like that?
Yes, I mean, yes, I have since I was a little girl.
I mean, you immediately make up a story.
For them, that makes sense for them.
Yeah.
I love doing that myself.
Well, you kind of have to.
When I was little, during World War II, my father was stationed in Colorado Springs for a couple of years, and we lived on a street.
At the end of the street, there was a hospital of some kind, a private hospital, and there was another little girl on the street whose father ran the hospital.
And so we used to play on the grounds, and we devised this game of walking around, writing down scraps of what people said, you know, overhearing dialogue and writing it down, and then making up stories.
I mean, it was actually the most fun game I ever devised or had devised for me as a child.
I mean, it was...
Of course you keep on doing that as an adult.
Well, as a professional writer who's also married to a professional writer, I wonder, do you do this with your husband if you're out to dinner and you see some people and you create stories for them?
Absolutely, yes.
We have it down to, we can even talk about them without their knowing it.
I mean, with a certain kind of code we have worked out.
My mother tells a story of being with a friend, and she speaks Greek.
And I forget where they were, certainly here.
And they were talking about this woman, you know, at another table in Greek.
You know, where this is going, right?
And just describing the relationship, you know, what was going on.
She was with a younger man.
She was bleach blonde, the whole thing.
And then they get up to leave, and then the woman said to them in Greek, you know, I hope you enjoyed your lunch or something.
Uh-huh.
And I said, I said, good for her.
I said, you deserve that.
You know, absolutely.
You're so arrogant, so cocky, you know, and
But it is funny.
You never know what's going to happen.
I do notice, having read a number of your husband's books as well, and I even interviewed him, he pays such close attention to detail, to little things.
I even indicated that he subscribes to off-the-wall magazines to get certain things.
And I just notice how you pick up
very precise little details and use them in your writing.
And I wonder if this is something that you pick up from each other in terms of... I think we both are just crazy about details, about specific things.
I was working with a child, a friend, who was
you know, working on an essay for a college application the other day, and I kept thinking, but can you be more specific?
Can you give me a specific here?
I mean, I always, the specific kind of gives it to you.
And it certainly gives it that, I hate to use these reviewers' words, you know, verisimilitude and all that stuff, but it really does.
And also the jargon of the period that you use so effectively, which you haven't heard for a while.
But these people during, you know, around Contra, it seems it's only, what, 12 or so years?
No, it seems longer, doesn't it?
It's almost... Now, is this something that you've been wanting to... Is this a comment for you as much as it is a novel?
I mean, a commentary on your part?
Well, I think you always want a novel to say something.
I mean, not anything you don't set out that way, but as it evolves, you...
You realize that it's about something, and it's not a... I wouldn't want... Because a novel is so complicated and fragile a thing, you can't reduce it to a statement, but it's about the relationship between...
private and public life between politics and responsibility.
You know, all those, I mean, I'm not very comfortable with those words.
Right.
As we're speaking, my wife just walked in and put on my desk this Sunday's New York Times book review, which features your book on the cover.
Yeah.
And as you're talking, I'm frantically jumping to page 10, you know, and I'm looking at this wonderful map they have here.
Isn't that great?
Yeah.
I know, it's so witty.
But did you see this in a way as a kind of a tragic love story?
Yes.
Yeah, that's part of it.
I mean, it's a... That's part of it.
I mean, it's...
But, you know, to keep up your interest for long enough to write a novel, you have to see it as a whole, one day you'll see it as one thing, and another day you'll see it as something else.
And the thing is to try to make those things work together.
I had actually, at one point early on in this book, when I was first messing around with it, not getting very far, I had thought it would be interesting to do a novel that also was a history.
that actually worked as a literal history of something that also worked as a novel.
I mean, it would be, the novel, I mean, the book would be an object that worked in two totally different genres.
Now, John said that I ought to read Simon Shama's Dead Certainties.
Interesting book, yeah.
Yeah, and I didn't read it at the time because I was, the whole idea of this was so turning in my own mind, I didn't want to suddenly see that he had done it already or that, anyway, it ended up that I couldn't do it.
So now I can read Simon Shaman.
I mean, I couldn't make that work in the,
in this book anyway.
Well, do you think, though, that you did succeed in giving, you know, the history in a... It's a poem of the history.
It is.
I mean, it's a... It's a... It's an improvisation on the history.
Hmm.
And, of course, undoubtedly, you want us to come away with an appreciation for the total cynicism of that period and...
Well, there are actual similarities to actual events.
I mean, there were several instances in which American ambassadors were, there were assassination attempts against American ambassadors in an attempt to mobilize American support for, I mean, a demented attempt to mobilize American support for an overt action.
So there were actual things
But then you just kind of forget those things and run with the story.
Sure, absolutely.
Do you see this, now this is, you've got, I guess it's five novels and five works of non-fiction.
Do you see this as a body of work, corpus?
Would you, if...
really suggest to someone who was interested in your work to start with book one and go through book ten, read them in order, and get a sense of what you've been up to.
I mean, that's a general question with the point of entry, but I'm wondering if you... I don't know.
I have no idea because I haven't ever done that.
In my mind,
There is no relation between... I don't see a logical line between Run River and this novel, if you see what I mean.
I don't see a logical development, but I haven't read them in that way.
I mean, I haven't read... At some point after you finish a novel, at some point in the next five years,
you will, or I will, finally get up the nerve to read it through, to read it through again.
I mean, you've read it through so many times when you're working on it, but to read it through as a reader.
But I've never gone back, after that one reading, I've never gone back to read them.
So I'm not too sure.
So the question then... I'm not, if I had to review them, I wouldn't do that.
You wouldn't?
I don't like to look back.
Really?
So completed work for you is completed work.
Completed, yeah.
These writers who are constantly, just to cite one example, I did an interview last year, was it two years ago, with Tim O'Brien and his new novel,
He's been very quietly going back and tinkering like with going after Cagliato for the paperbacks and stuff.
Really?
Yeah, he got an amusing letter from one professor who was reading the hard coverage in the class, and the class was reading the paperback, and they were getting different things.
And I said, Tim, why would you do that?
And he said, well, I have a responsibility to make the most perfect work that I can.
I said, but doesn't that work?
speak for a time in your life.
That's a book you wrote back in the 60s or whatever.
I don't know how you would do it because who you were at that period is so deep in the grain of the book you wrote during that period.
If you started trying to correct it from the perspective of 10 or 20 years later, you would be opening a real book
basket of snakes.
And just to switch gears entirely here and going back to, I haven't really asked you much about the novel.
That's my job to read it and to
to grasp it, but structurally I did find also the narrator.
She reveals elements of herself as we go along.
I mean, at the very beginning, you don't even know if this narrator is a male or a female.
Right, yeah.
And I wonder if you were mindfully working with that part of the structure as well when you were writing this.
No, I hadn't thought of
At one point, I was, as I said in the novel, I was going to have the narrator be more of a character than she is.
She's only a character now to the extent that she has to be, I mean, that she has to have had access to some of these, or an interest.
I didn't even, I wasn't too interested in how she had access, but how she...
But her interest I had to justify in some way.
I mean, she certainly knows the questions to ask even so many years after the fact, you know.
She's very close to being a player in an indirect way.
It's just an observation.
I guess I wanted to know more about her.
And who's she writing this piece for, you know?
I mean, was this an extension of yourself, do you think, this character?
That character is me, yes.
Oh, okay.
I guess that's what I was driving at.
That character is me.
And they're quite secure this way.
And so, but this is not an autobiographical novel in any way.
Not at all, but it's a lot of certain things like I did
have a child at the Westlake School for Girls.
We did have a career day.
So certain things are from that.
There is a party like that.
There used to be a party like that on Academy Award night.
You know, I mean, so certain elements of that Los Angeles life were drawn from
Our real life.
Now, you've been in New York.
We moved here in 1988.
And are you missing the West Coast at all?
Well, I miss certain things about it, like having a garden and cars and swimming pool and supermarkets mainly.
That's what I miss every day is a supermarket.
But, I mean, when I'm there, I miss other things about here.
But, of course, you are a California woman, I guess.
Yeah, I still have a California driver's license.
Okay, that's great.
And I'm not going to ask you questions.
It's not quite a press kit, I have to say, with other...
Articles and magazine pieces.
I'm not going to bore you with questions about your biographical background and stuff, except that I think I know the material that's relevant, and I'm not going to ask you to go over any of that.
Maybe if you could just comment on the various hats that you wear as a screenwriter, a writer of literary journalism, essays, and fiction.
I mean, you really do a lot of different, have a lot of writing, different writing skills.
And how do you decide which one to do?
And is there any particular areas?
Well, how we decide when to do a picture is when we need money.
I mean, we actually always usually have the picture going at some level.
I mean,
a picture an assignment to do a picture at some at some stage but we aren't all I mean for example right now we are have a picture we're going to start at some point this fall but John is finishing a long piece and I am
Well, I am not doing, I'm supposed to be doing along a couple of pieces, but I'm not right now because I'm sort of getting, I have to go away next week and I've sort of been involved in publication stuff.
So it just kind of works out as to how, then we will probably, I will do the pieces when I get back from this trip and
John will by then be finished with his piece, and then we will probably maybe go someplace and take a period of time to do a first draft of his screenplay.
Sounds like waiting for a conjunction of the planets, isn't it?
Yeah.
I mean, it all kind of just has to fall.
So it's how we decide to do something in a real way depends on each other because we do work together on screenplay.
And that anticipates the question.
I mean, physically, as I read, you work quite apart from each other, and I think that's necessary.
But what is there about the dynamic of, I mean, is it a synergistic thing when you work on it?
On screenplay?
Yeah.
Screenplay is not anything like writing.
It's like stuff.
it's making up a story, but it isn't like sitting in a room making that story perfect.
What I mean is it's not something that you do.
The whole essence of writing is that you're sitting there by yourself doing it.
That's the experience, right?
Working on a screenplay, you are generally doing it
First of all, with your collaborator, if you have a collaborator.
Then you are doing it with a director.
Then you are doing it to satisfy locations and satisfy actors.
And the studio is a player all the way through this, too.
So there are essentially dozens of people.
This is before the picture even gets to the production phase.
There are dozens of people who are involved.
at a very close level with what you're doing.
So it's not like sitting in a room by yourself writing.
It's something different.
It's like going to the office.
It's like having a job.
It's a different activity.
And you don't have a proprietary sense of... You couldn't possibly because it's not yours.
I mean, in the first place, you don't even legally own...
Even the characters, if you give the character a name, right?
Exactly.
As many writers have found to their great... Exactly, yeah.
Every word you write on a screenplay belongs to the studio.
So... So it's a different kind of... That's a way to make a living, I guess, is what you're saying.
And it's quite... I like it.
I like... I mean, I find the craft of it interesting.
And I like the people...
And you clearly don't have a thin skin when they fool around with your copy either.
No, no, no, no, no, because there's no ego involved.
It's not, it doesn't involve, I mean, it's not like having somebody edit a piece or suggest that there's something wrong, a deep flaw in a book.
Right.
But let's say, let's go a step further now.
Is there a film deal on this new book?
Well, someone has been talking to me about it, but it's still at such a preliminary stage that I don't know what's going to happen.
But now how would you feel about that being, would you... Well, the person who's been talking to me about it is somebody I would feel very good about.
Okay.
But you probably also would consider that quite an entirely different project from the book in any case.
Yeah, it is.
We have done screenplays.
Well, I just rented The True Confessions a couple of weeks ago.
Working on a screenplay of your own book is an odd thing because to work on a screenplay of a book, you tear the book apart.
I mean, you start, you essentially deconstruct the book.
That's right.
And...
It's odd to do that to your own book, but you do it as if it were somebody else's book.
It's rather easy to set aside the fact that it's your own book when you're in that role.
I get you.
Now that you've done this novel, did you enjoy the exercise, having thought earlier that you might not return to it?
Yeah, I did.
I mean, I did.
I enjoyed doing this one thing.
I enjoyed doing the plot.
I really liked that.
It was really hard.
I mean, I could not.
I didn't know a lot of stuff.
how a lot of stuff was going to play out until, really until I played it out.
I didn't know who Max Epperson was, for example, until the reader does.
That's interesting.
So working out that, which is one of those things where you put down certain cards in the table and then you try to figure out why they're there.
And is she, in your view, a tragic figure?
Elena?
I don't know whether I would call her tragic.
I thought that she came out rather ahead here, although dead.
I mean, that she had... She had... She had finally found her way to...
to a kind of irreducible truth.
Which is triumphant in a way, isn't it?
Very interesting.
And how about next project?
I want to do something about California.
I don't know exactly in what form.
I've been doing some non-fiction stuff.
I've done a couple of long pieces about California, and I would like to do it.
non-fiction I mean a long kind of extended exploration of California but I have to figure a way to get into it I have to tell you how much I enjoyed your piece on Woodward in the New York Review oh thank you I love
It's really deciding what's news, isn't it?
If you own the bottle of ink, I guess you can... It's just amazing.
Yeah, when I started going through all this stuff, I really found myself kind of astonished.
And how banal and meaningless, some of these quotes.
And I've noticed this about his books.
I mean, he's studied thousands of documents.
Did you actually believe, by the way, that he'd get in to see Casey?
I mean, this is not for my piece.
I don't know.
I mean, he may have walked in to see Casey.
You know, you had conversations with
with people who are in that condition.
They don't mean anything.
You know, they're thinking about their mother or their... They're on their way out and they're drugged.
Yeah.
Who cares?
I mean, he's probably not enough.
You know, just get out of my room, will you?
Yeah.
Who are you again?
Exactly.
And what difference does it make?
It is important because I know people who really believe he lied about that.
I don't think he would have lied about it, but he inflated it.
He inflated it.
He's very interesting.
I turned down an opportunity to interview him on this book, by the way, which I never thought I'd turn down Bob Woodward, but I'm so disgusted with what his books have become recently, and I guess I really enjoyed reading your take on the whole thing.
You did a very nice job.
Oh, thank you.
Well, I don't have to go on at length.
I think there's plenty of...